README.md, before:

# NetGuard

## Description
NetGuard is a machine-learning based project designed to assist security analysts in identifying malicious network traffic. This project applies preprocessing learning technuques to network flow data, with a focus on the challenge of detecting rare attack types in imbalanced datasets. 

## Dataset
This project uses the CIC-IDS2017 dataset provided by the Candian Institute for Cybersecurity. This dataset represents traffic seen throughout the week including benign and malicious activity. Due to the size of the dataset, it is not included and must be downloaded seperately. 
## Notebook

The Jupyter Notebook included in this project is the full ML pipeline including preprocessing, model training and evaluation. For ease of use, all the user has to do is replace the name of the dataset on the second block with your set of choice and run all cells. 

Download the dataset here: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html

## How to Run
Download the data set above and ensure all the files are in the same directory. Run all cells making sure to have the desired dataset loaded as there are multiple available. Required libraries at the top of the notebook may need installation. 

## Results
Struggled with tuesday working hour dataset, confusing XSS for brute force and vice versa, not as bad BF to XSS tho 
## Future Improvements

Commit message:

Revise results section and clarify model limitations
Updated results section to reflect model accuracy and challenges with attack types. Added details on evaluation metrics and oversampling technique used to address dataset imbalance.

README.md, after:

# NetGuard

## Description
NetGuard is a machine-learning based project designed to assist security analysts in identifying malicious network traffic. This project applies preprocessing learning technuques to network flow data, with a focus on the challenge of detecting rare attack types in imbalanced datasets. 

## Dataset
This project uses the CIC-IDS2017 dataset provided by the Candian Institute for Cybersecurity. This dataset represents traffic seen throughout the week including benign and malicious activity. Due to the size of the dataset, it is not included and must be downloaded seperately. 
## Notebook

The Jupyter Notebook included in this project is the full ML pipeline including preprocessing, model training and evaluation. For ease of use, all the user has to do is replace the name of the dataset on the second block with your set of choice and run all cells. 

Download the dataset here: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html

## How to Run
Download the data set above and ensure all the files are in the same directory. Run all cells making sure to have the desired dataset loaded as there are multiple available. Required libraries at the top of the notebook may need installation. 

## Results
The model was extremely accurate in most cases, this project should not be used to do an analysts job for them, rather to help an analyst notices trends that are commonn with different attack types. The evaluation on this project includes precision, recall, F-1 score, and confusion matrices. Most notably, rare attack types such as XSS or SQL Injection have a low recall due to the dataset being so inbalanced towards begnign traffic. To help solve this I implemented oversampling, a technuique that increases the number of rare cases. 
Another interesting dataset is the Tuesday working hour dataset, this test often confused XSS attacks and Brute Force attacks. These two could have been confused because they both can produce bursts of same requests, and due to the model only taking CSV data it cannot fully see the attack logic.

## Future Improvements
This project uses a Random Forest Classifier, which is susceptible to overfitting and not a great fit for imbalanced datasets. Althought the oversampling reduces the affect of some of these problems I would like to switch to a gradient model such as LightGBM or XGBoost.
